Thomas welcome to the podcast a pleasure
to have you here well thank you drew
it's nice to be here give us a few of
your Top Line beliefs when it comes to
what cancer is and why it's become so
pervasive in our society
well I mean we know what cancer is is
cell division out of control
dysregulated cell growth that's the
textbook definition of what cancer is
it's not a complicated phenomenon I mean
it's just cell division out of control
um you know what causes that is damage
to oxidative phosphorylation
so uh and that that leads to the
dysregulation of the cells so what
control why why does one sell
uh start or a group of cells start to
divide out of control in some tissue or
some group of cells and the answer is
um the organelle that controls the cell
cycle and the differentiated state of
the cell is corrupted it's not producing
energy the red the way it should be
um and why is cancer so pervasive
because the environment that we live in
today
um damages
uh the energy metabolism in in these
cells leading to what I just described
as dysregulated cell growth
so so how does that happen well
as I said in as I clearly said there's
it's it's there's many secondary causes
of cancer there's only one primary cause
and that's and that's damage to the
ability of the cell to generate energy
through oxygen what could damage that
well radiation could damage that uh
chemical carcinogens can damage that
intermittent hypoxia could do that uh
chronic inflammation can do that
oncogenic viruses uh papilloma viruses
um a rare inherited mutations these are
all secondary risk factors not the
primary risk fact primary risk factor is
damage to oxidative phosphorylation with
a compensatory fermentation process this
is exactly what Warburg said uh the the
issue of course is it can happen in many
many different ways so we are today
living
in an environment that makes all of this
possible and then you couple that with a
diet a highly processed carbohydrates
minimal exercise uh in conjunction with
these secondary risk factors and you
have an epidemic of one over almost 1700
people A Day in the United States dying
from cancer it's not a mystery it's to
me it's not a mystery at all it's very
clear uh the the basis for this connect
the dots again starting with laying the
groundwork here now that you've talked
about you know what cancer is and
getting everybody on the same page
where do your beliefs differ from what
is commonly understood out there
especially when it comes to cancer and
metabolic Health you have to separate
you have to separate these two because
the metabolic health is is basically
prevention
um uh that's how you prevent how do you
prevent cancer you just keep your
mitochondria healthy uh how do you do
that well you avoid the secondary risk
factors as best you can some of these
risk factors we are very difficult to
avoid
um let's be honest I mean our society
today is I mean we're sitting in traffic
in cars uh we don't have the necessary
exercise to keep our mitochondria
healthy uh we're running around in a
very hyper hyper Society all of these
all of these things uh will cause
chronic uh damage to oxidative
phosphorylation and then put yourselves
at risk for some form of uh some form of
cancer but but the the other issue the
first part of your your question
has to do with what the field thinks the
can what or uh what's the origin of
cancer and they think it's a genetic
disease and
um and this is the big the big problem
right now uh the National Cancer
Institute which which represents the
federal government's treatment and
diagnosis and plans for managing cancer
are all locked into this uh view that
cancer is caused by somatic mutations
and that's clearly not the case
so
um uh any events uh so you were
representing a
uh a misunderstanding of what the nature
of cancer is and that's coming from the
the National Cancer Institute itself so
The Very Organized organization
that
uh sponsors hundreds of millions of
dollars in research support is of the
opinion uh that cancer is something
other than what it is
so when you have this Force supported in
in large part by the pharmaceutical
industry so that National Cancer
Institute supported by many of the major
corporations of of this area all are on
the lockstep into thinking that cancer
is a genetic disease and therefore the
therapies that are being developed are
based on that uh misunderstanding it's
not a genetic disease so the therapies
that are being thrown at this disease
are ultimately going to fail for the
majority of people not all people but
the majority of people were not moving
the needle of survivability in any
significant way except for a few folks
but if if the needle were to be uh
changed moved why are we having almost 1
700 people a day dying from cancer if
we're making any major progress in any
of the stuff that you hear about why are
we not changing the needle why why do we
continue to have all the these dead
people piling up everywhere it's not
interested in the United States it's
worldwide
and the treatments that you have for
cancer worldwide are pretty much the
same in every major country and
radiation and chemo and and a bunch of
crap like that and that's not part of
this medieval that kind of that speaks
to a fundamental misunderstanding a lack
of knowledge uh on on what the nature of
the disease is so therefore you don't
get it you don't get progress and the
disease continues to become uh uh the
epidemic continues not that complicated
and I've heard you another interview say
we have made progress and a lot of
people listening here are also see the
headlines in sort of news and media that
there's been progress but what a lot of
people don't understand it's primarily
been through the anti-smoking campaign
can you talk about that yeah yeah well
that was the big progress that was huge
so I mean another thing you have to
realize lung cancer is still the number
one killer the number one even though
people stop smoking so uh pollutants in
the environment can still give you lung
cancer even if you never smoked at all
but you're right
um we we had this powerful anti-smoking
campaign in the beginning of the 90s uh
where smoking
um was be the population recognized the
health hazards secondhand smoke and all
this other kinds of stuff and people
began to slowly stop smoking I mean they
were forced outside buildings uh they
had to smoke outside sometimes there was
no smoking anywhere and as the result of
this you know behaviors began to change
and as behaviors began to change the
incidence of cancer lung cancer
especially uh started to decrease and
many other cancers as well that were all
linked to smoking so the progress we've
made has been prevention not in
treatment there's been no major advance
in reducing death from treatments that
have been developed the majority of the
advance has been in in prevention which
was the anti-smoking campaign so so uh
when you hear about all these drugs on
TV or we got all this they're all based
on the somatic mutation theory of cancer
they will work very effectively for some
people there's no question about it but
not for the majority of people suffering
from the majority of cancers
you've shared that there's a fundamental
misunderstanding
of
how cancer
really is driven we understand what it
is right but it's a fundamental
understanding of how it's driven and
you've written a book called cancer as a
metabolic disease how did you come to
the conclusions that there was this
metabolic component that was a huge part
of how cancer was built up and not this
genetic component which is how most of
the Western World looked at and still
looks at cancer
yeah well we we were
um we were studying epilepsy uh for many
years and they use calorie restricted
ketogenic diets for managing seizures in
kids uh throughout the world and
um we were also studying the
biochemistry of cancer when we treated
mice with calorie restricted diets that
had where you have blood sugar when
would go down and the ketones would go
up which is an evolutionarily conserved
adaptation to food restriction
um these tumors were really shrinking up
and going away or not going away but
really getting small
and then we said you know what's going
on here and I said well this is what
Warburg said Warburg said if you lower
the blood sugar you're gonna you're
gonna restrict the availability of the
fuel to the tumor
and um what I did to test warburg's
hypothesis I went and looked at the
structure and function of mitochondria
and all the major cancer cells and
they're all damaged in some way or
another so and and biology a a
foundational principle is structure
determines function we know this
evolutionary biology says structure
determines function so when you look
under the electron microscope and look
at cancer mitochondria they're all in
various ways damaged when you look at
their biochemistry they're damaged
they're not going to be able to generate
energy through using oxygen so how in
the hell are these cells growing out of
control if they're not behaving like our
normal cells and Warburg said they
ferment wow this is exciting they
ferment that means they get energy
without oxygen this is an ancient
pathway again linked to evolutionary
biology so you go back and you find that
all the organisms on the planet before
oxygen came into the atmosphere 2.5
billion years ago were all fermenters
and they were growing out of control no
regulation so the tumor cells are doing
nothing more than falling back on these
ancient primitive Pathways to grow so
the first thing you say was what the
hell are they you can't grow without
energy energy is everything
it's not that complicated energy is ever
ATP ATP is energy without ATP nothing
can survive nothing can grow so the
question is where you get your energy
from I'm doing fermentation what does
that mean energy without oxygen oh well
what can generate energy without oxygen
glucose is the prime fuel the sugar
glucose and now we have discovered in no
uncertain terms that they can ferment
amino acids but the key amino acid is
the glutamine amino acid so we put the
two together completely restore what
Warburg said he just didn't know about
the amino acid fermentation and now we
know so I said let's test why don't we
test targeting these tumor cells by
depriving them of glucose and the
glutamine the two fermentable fuels and
we kill them okay and we're right at the
beginning of this we built the Press
pulse therapeutic process of how to kill
cancer cells without toxicity now you
say to yourself well why in the hell
doesn't their field recognize what we're
doing because they're locked into the
ideological Dogma the cancer is a
genetic disease so if you're locked into
the Dogma the cancer is a genetic
disease you're not even able to think
about what I just said and what's more
even if you do think about what I'm
saying you might lose your Grant from
the NIH because the NIH says cancer is a
genetic disease so you put it all
together and you have this problem the
problem is we clearly understand how
cancer arises we clearly understand how
to manage it but the ideological Dogma
says no no that's not right why because
they don't they either ignore or they
don't understand what I just said and I
published these papers I try to write
them in crayons so that even the the
dullest of people could understand it
and and they still uh they still won't
understand but I'll tell you who
understands it the people in the street
understand it I'll tell you that much
which is why we want to have you on this
podcast as an ability to spread your
message and to talk about your research
now you just shared a lot and we're
going to spend the rest of our time here
unpacking a lot of those statements that
are there but I thought because a lot of
individuals are not familiar with the
work of Otto Warburg give us a little
bit of a history lesson who was he and
what got him started down the pathway of
looking into cancer in the first place
well you know Warburg
um was an interesting character as a as
a matter of fact Sam Apple just wrote
the book uh ravenous uh which is
warburg's history
um he's he did a very good job uh on his
book and going over the early the Early
parts of warburg's career
and uh you know he had come from a very
aristocratic scientific background where
um many as many of his his friends and
his father's friends were all of the
elite scientists of Germany uh you know
Einstein and and a number of these other
top physicists uh biochemists and these
kind and uh Warburg was uh was into this
crowd so he had this uh very egalitarian
background of uh aristocratic uh
scientific uh knowledge with it with a
bent of of strict biochemistry with
physics uh approach to this uh this
whole thing I mean he served in the in
the deutsches hair the German Army in
the first world war he was an equestrian
of a Calvary regiment in prusa
um so he Einstein apparently got him out
of the army because they felt that he
was too his too valuable to be riding
his horse in on the Russian front
uh you know
coaxing the enemy to take a shot at him
and uh they said his loss would be two
of a great loss to science so he was uh
brought back and set up his own lab uh
in Berlin uh he had several Labs over
the years but but
um yeah so he started all this stuff and
um his work was recognized he didn't
receive a Nobel Prize for his work on
cancer but he did for his work on on
defining the enzyme responsible for
generating energy through oxygen
um the the cytochrome C we call it the
respiratory enzyme so he what he knew he
knew energy metabolism in the cell
better than anyone else at that time he
worked with emden he worked with
Meyerhoff he worked with all the great
thinkers and biochemists of that day and
he was able to to understand the origin
of energy metabolism in cancer and he
was the one
he and others showed that you know uh if
a tumor were growing in a rat uh and you
gave the rat Cyanide and of course
everybody knows about cyanide that's the
Kool-Aid right when you say he drank the
Kool-Aid the Kool-Aid from
um what was that what was that the group
of people they all committed suicide
drinking the Kool-Aid yeah um
Heaven's Gate yeah Jones The Joneses
yeah the Jones yep yeah yeah they all
they all had okay so he put Cyanide and
Kool-Aid and you drink the Kool-Aid and
you're dead instantly because cyanide
kills you very quick all right but if
you take a rat that has a big tumor and
you give the cat the rat cyanide the rat
will die but not the tumor so the tumor
doesn't use oxygen fascinating and and
it just explained just connect the dots
there just for a second here because we
have a lot of people that are lay people
how does cyanide work and why is oxygen
a crucial part of that process yeah
the electrons from the food that we eat
we break down the food that we eat in
the in the Krebs cycle and we we
transfer uh the foods that we eat the
electrons to the electron transport
chain
and this gradient of electron movement
coupled with a proton mode of gradient
now I'm going to get into a little bit
more deep biochemistry it creates a a
gradient uh by by forcing protons on one
side of the membrane and the electrons
then combine with oxygen
and uh the protons come back through and
they the power of the protons coming
through and the oxygen accepting the
electrons you you you you produce ATP
the the the the fuel of Life energy ATP
uh the fuel of life and
um uh so the cells do that and then the
the enzyme cytochrome C oxidase is
critical for delivering the electrons to
oxygen and cyanide binds that uh
cytochrome C oxidase which completely
shuts down this whole transport process
shutting off completely shutting off the
ability of the cell to generate energy
using oxygen so the oxygen is there but
it can't bind the electrons so so what
happens is you die real quick you die
real quick the the why the cancer cell
doesn't die from this is because they're
fermenting and using fermentation a
completely different energy mechanism it
happens not in the Mito conjure it
happens in the cytoplasm actually a part
of it does happen in the mitochondria
it's called mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorylation and we have
defined that as the second major source
but that can also happen without oxygen
so um so we have two forms of energy in
the cancer cell neither of which need
oxygen and they're both these ancient
fermentation Pathways one is in the
cytoplasm of the cell and the other is
in the mitochondria of the cell now it's
a very important when I speak like this
because there's a lot of folks out there
but might not
um be familiar with the terminology and
as I say to cancer patients if you want
to stay alive you'd be very it would be
in your interest to understand basic
biology because the guys who are going
to treat you at the top medical schools
appear not to have that level of
knowledge otherwise they wouldn't be
treating you with the way they're
treating you so it's up to every
individual who would like to survive
cancer to understand some of the things
that I'm saying uh because it's it's
their soul it's their existence on the
planet that will all that will
ultimately be uh involved with this
right
there yeah when I say well people say
well he's saying stuff I don't
understand hey that's their personal
problem you want to stay alive you
better start understanding some of this
stuff it's called scientific literacy
yeah and unfortunately in our country
today from the covet absurdity you can
see that majority of people in our
country today lack scientific literacy
so so and I don't I don't want to sound
like hey but but you get cancer you
better understand some of this stuff
because you're going to be be part of
the they're going to be part of the
planet before long yeah and even if the
people treating the folks knock on wood
unfortune for those that have gotten
cancer might you know want to talk to
you about my mom's story was diagnosed
with breast cancer many years ago took
very much a similar approach to what you
talk about here kind of had to assemble
her own team and everything when it came
to breast cancer knock on what she's
doing okay but for the people that you
know get cancer super unfortunate
disease my heart goes out to everybody
there's probably people listening today
because you become so popular on YouTube
and on the podcasting circuit that are
seeking out your information that are
listening today that have cancer so even
if they are treated by people that have
that knowledge there's a sense where we
even saw this during covid
consensus medicine becomes such a force
that even people who have questions are
scared to ask those questions that are
there because there's such a consensus
and that happens in a lot of Industries
but it even happens in medicine as well
and I think that's the positive side of
a lot of the questioning that came out
of even things like covid is that we
understood that just because something
has consensus around it doesn't mean
necessarily that it's accurate No not
always but sometimes it can be but but
again you have to be able to determine
um you know what's I don't want to go
down the covet path because there's it's
a political hot water right and that's
obviously a whole step everybody gets
everybody gets like fired up about one
thing or another yeah yeah but but
you're a larger we're dealing with
cancer now coven's gone let's okay let's
let's we're that that's already down the
river right yeah and your voice you're
all happy that we don't have to worry
about that thing anymore right your
larger Point nonetheless with cancer is
this what we're doing is not working
in fact there might be and we'll get to
this in a second our current treatments
today which are a lot of the same
treatments that have been here since
basically what the 50s is that accurate
to say right yeah it could be you know a
lot of treatments minus some new
evolving things which you have your own
thoughts on immunotherapy Etc there may
be even some situations where they're
actually potentially doing more harm
than good yeah I think so without you
know
yeah you have to realize that um
yeah I mean there's what we we say this
cancer survivors I mean there's a lot of
millions of cancer survivors that have
survived uh standard of care which is
the radiation and chemo and whatever
else that that would be involved but but
many of those folks
um pay a real price
uh for that survival
um they suffer immensely
uh if they do survive and and many times
they there they have ailments and
abilities and problems
uh that came about as the talk as the
result of the toxic treatments they
received many many people are suffering
from the surgical mutilations
uh that their bodies have endured uh
many people are suffering from uh
adverse consequences of high-dose
poisons uh that their bodies have been
exposed to many people are suffering
from the ramifications of high-dose
radiation
so you have to look at the Litany of
ailments associated with cancer
survivors
uh and that's a an area of the emerging
medicine now cancer survivor medicine
uh so if you feel that you have survived
these toxic massively toxic and
mutilation treatments uh you have many
people not all people have a lot of um
psychological problems Neuropsychiatric
problems many people have hormonal
imbalance problems many people have
problems with their microbiomes many
people have problems uh with uh
metabolic homeostasis so you you have a
whole Litany of problems that you never
had but for the fact that you survived
the treatments that were given to you
and then there's those folks who who
don't survive these treatments and some
of these newer treatments will kill you
faster than the disease itself uh with
the hope that you might be one of those
you know percentage of people that
actually does respond really well to the
treatment and everybody wants to be that
person who really does well uh but in
fact many people uh uh don't are not
that person and they suffer immensely uh
with chronic problems sometimes for the
remainder of their life and and a lot of
times they don't live as long as those
as as they could have lived had they not
been subjected to these horrifically
toxic treatments to manage a disease
which in my mind does not require the
use of toxic treatments so um so we have
this problem it's a it's a it's a it's a
it's a massive tragedy in my mind it's
just it's just something that doesn't
need to have have to happen we'll chat
more about that I want to put a little
bow tie on some of your history that you
were talking about with Otto Wahlberg
because I think it's important here
before we get into your work in research
which you gave a little preview on what
were the core fundamental things that we
later understood that Otto got right and
what were some of the things that he
kind of got wrong that you've had a
chance to build on
well he got right that the origin of
cancer involves disruption of oxidative
phosphorylation uh he got right the fact
that in order to stay alive the cell
needs to find an alternative energy
source and that alternative energy
source is fermentation so this is very
interesting because cells uh many cells
will be subjected what Warburg clearly
said is that if oxfos oxidative
phosphorylation energy using oxygen is
acutely damaged it will kill the cell
just like I said to cyanide cyanide will
kill cells massively fast okay if you
kill a cell it can never become a cancer
cell so the origin of cancer has to be a
chronic Interruption of energy through
oxygen oxidative phosphorus can't be
acute so Warburg was 100 correct about
that he says if you damage this system
too acutely you'll kill the cell and a
dead cell can never become a cancer cell
so the damage to this respiration has to
be chronic and it has to be chronic
because it requires the cell to form an
alternative it has to be able to up
regulate alternative form of energy to
replace the Lost energy from oxidative
phosphorylation which is fermentation
so there's only two forms of energy that
we know about in cells one is oxidative
phosphorylation which is the use of
oxygen we breathe we're breathing you
and I have breath normal cells do all
cells or majority they're not the red
blood cells but but most of the cells in
our body will be using oxygen for energy
um and producing water
and CO2 so every time we exhale we blow
out CO2 and water moisture and
um uh those are the waste products of
oxidative phosphorylation and it's
highly alley efficient so it allows our
cells to do all kinds of unique
functions brain cells liver cells colon
cells they all do their own specific
function they're all using oxidative
phosphorylation and what happens then is
in order to get cancer you have to have
a cell that can transition from
oxidative phosphorylation to the ancient
pathway of fermentation
and if as I said if it happens too
quickly the cancer cell will die but if
it happens chronically the cell then has
an opportunity like exactly like Warburg
said to shift away from oxidative
phosphorylation and rely more on the
substrate level phosphorylation
so so
um uh this is this is the transition
from one source of energy to a second
source of energy but you have to also
realize that the organelle inside the
cell that's responsible for oxidative
phosphorylation is the mitochondria and
the minor the same organelle that allows
us to generate energy very efficiently
also regulates the cell cycle the cell
is stabilized and we call a
differentiated State it's stable not
growing and it's doing it's it's
metabolically designed activities well
why because the organelle that controls
all this the mitochondria is operational
when that organelle loses gradually its
capability of maintaining energy and the
cell slowly forces into fermentation the
very organelle that controls the
differentiated State loses that control
and the cells fall back on proliferation
which is what the cell would normally do
if it weren't appropriately regulated by
the mitochondria so the mitochondria
controls the cell cycle and when that
organelle becomes defective you get two
things the cell is fermenting and
proliferating at the same time and it
happens slowly gradually and as the
waste products of fermentation are
lactic acid and succinic acid
acidification of the micro environment
which then feeds back further damaging
oxidative phosphorylation and you get
this situate called that escalating
situation of biological chaos leading to
a dysregulated cell growth a change in
the micro environment which then feeds
forward to continue this abnormal growth
and by the time you see it it has
already
established a micro environment now you
begin to see something because for a
long time that would be completely uh go
unnoticed either by the patients or by
any any uh what we call scanning
screening any of these things you see
something by scanning and screening the
that's already a well-established
developed
growth whether that growth is metastatic
or not metastatic whether it's malignant
or benign you know that that all can
happen but all of that happens uh on
this transition from oxidative
phosphorylation to fermentation and the
type of cell that's involved with this
determines whether or not that that
growth will be malignant or benign and
that that can be uh that also has to
come into the the question but in cancer
we're always concerned with the
malignant aspect of this growth that's
out of control so the the question of
course is what is driving this
dysregulated what's the everywhere it's
dysregulated because the mitochondria
active are
ineffective okay what is what's thriving
before you get into that can can I just
from my standpoint repeat back to you
what I'm sort of hearing big picture as
layperson not a medical expert to make
sure that I have the correct
understanding is that long before human
beings were around
cells had this methodology of getting
energy through fermentation as you've
described and that's sort of built in to
the survival mechanism of not every cell
but a lot of cells that are there and
through a combination of things which
you're going to get to in a second
things that are driving this we have
created a situation where we've forced
can't we forced normal cells to in a way
become cancerous we call that a disease
but if we really look at it it's almost
a survival mechanism of the cell
switching from one way of going about
creating energy to being forced to
consuming energy through another pathway
this fermentation pathway but in that
process the cells the cancer cells which
were previously healthy they now have
become out of control and they have
dysregulated unregulated growth which
ultimately ends up leading to a whole
cascading situations of problems is that
accurate is there anything I missed in
that no no I think that's pretty good I
I think it did a good job on that and
and uh I think that the mutant during
this process of mitochondrial
dysfunction that happens gradually
the mitochondria throw out what we call
reactive oxygen species Ros these are
radical species that can damage proteins
lipids and the DNA the nucleic acids RNA
and DNA can be damaged by these Ross so
the they are largely uh come they come
out of the mitochondria uh because the
mitochondria as the mitochondria of the
cell becomes more and more dysfunctional
they they produce rather than producing
ATP the energy that they normally would
produce they produce Ros and they are
the Ross are carcinogenic and mutagenic
so the mutations that you see in the
cancer cell are Downstream effects of
the damage to the reactive of the
mitochondria so the field of cancer is
focusing their energies and their
attention on Downstream extreme stuff
that is that is not relevant to the
majority of cancers so when when you
hear people speak of the elk mutation
the p53 mutation and all these mutations
they're all Downstream effects they're
not the cause of cancer they're the
effects of the production of reactive
oxygen species because the mitochondria
have become abnormal they're throwing
out these radicals that are damaging
lipids and proteins and causing
mutations in the nucleus and the field
almost the entire cancer field is
focused on all this kind of stuff and
I'm saying and others in Warburg said no
no no you got to go back and figure out
where the energy is coming from because
you're collecting mutations in the
nucleus that are largely irrelevant but
they're coming because of the
acidification in the micro environment
they're coming because of the reactive
oxygen species but the most important
question is how what is the fuel that is
driving the dysregulated cell growth
okay what's the energy what are these
cells using to divide and as you said
when we go back in time we find out that
all of the cells that existed on the
planet were using those ancient
fermentation Pathways because there was
no oxygen in the atmosphere so they grew
dysregulated growth and the interesting
thing is they would grow without
regulation uh until the fermentable
fuels in the micro environment were
dissipated and then these cells would up
and die so that's holding me right away
that uh the way you kill cancer cells is
you divide deprive them of their
fermentable fuels and because that's
what's driving the dysregulated growth
they're dysregulated because the
mitochondria are no longer in control of
the system and now they're just growing
as long as they have fermentable fuels
just like our our uh ancestral cells 2.5
billion years ago uh uh so now why did
why did biology start to have integrated
action and that was with the symbiotic
interaction between uh one type of
protistive bacteria that could harvest
the energy of oxygen in the cell which
led to metazoans which are more than one
cell uh um they're they're they're
multicellular
multicellularity arose with the origin
of the mitochondria in the cytoplasm
that led to regulated growth so you have
to go back really long in evolutionary
terms to find such systems where uh
preceded mitochondria yeah in the
evolution of organisms on the planet and
these cancer cells are going back that
far so they will grow out of control as
long as they have fermentation fuels in
their micro environment and as we have
shown and Warburg had shown glucose is a
prime fermentable fuel in the micro
environment of the tumor cell and as we
have now shown uh the the amino acid
glutamine is another fermentable fuel in
the tumor microenvironment so the
solution to the cancer problem now
becomes very clear you need to restrict
the availability of the fermentable
fuels while transitioning the body over
to fuels that cannot be fermented like
fatty acids and Ketone bodies so this is
a a clear strategy
to manage cancer without toxicity you
take you target simultaneously the two
fuels that are driving the Beast both
from fermentable fuels and you
transition the rest of the body
glucose and glutamine are the
fermentable fuels in the micro
environment and then you transition the
body over to Ketone bodies or fatty
acids which cannot be fermented so these
two fuels cannot be fermented by cancer
cells which require fermentation for
growth so it becomes very clear but you
can't ketones do not kill cancer cells
ketones and fatty acids are for the good
of the normal cells of our body they
they don't need glucose and glutamine if
they can respire fatty acids and Ketone
bodies they don't have dysfunctional
mitochondria the cancer cell does so we
can marginalize the cancer cell simply
by depriving of its fermentable fuels
and protecting all of the normal cells
in the body by shifting them over to
Ketone bodies which now becomes a
non-fuel for the cancer cell that makes
sense it absolutely makes sense and
really connecting the dots here for the
audience that's following along your
early work in the field of epilepsy and
showing that uh essentially a ketogenic
diet right because again we're talking
about that and you know ketogenic diet
is the most studied diet when it comes
to uh brain health and specifically
people dealing with epilepsy it was the
first treatment right that was
um used for targeting I believe it was
kids or
yeah it was a Wilder in 1921 1921. yeah
but he he Wilder studied epilepsy but he
realized that if you put kids on water
only fasting the seizures would go away
right but we realized that uh what is
when you don't eat food what's the major
changes in the blood and the blood sugar
goes down and and Ketone bodies which
are um uh water-soluble breakdown
product of fats so the fat the fats in
our body uh
um are mobilized these fatty acids then
go into the bloodstream
they go to the liver and the liver chops
them up like a wood chip wood chipper
and make small
um molecules called Ketone bodies
and these are water-soluble products of
the breakdown of fatty acids and they go
to the brain they can replace glucose in
the brain they can be burned by the
Heart by muscles so the combination
between Ketone bodies and fatty acids uh
can be respired if you have a good
respiration system with respect to the
epilepsy now here's the interesting
thing so Wilder says uh well we can't
you know cure epilepsy by have starving
people to death
um so let's build a diet that does what
a normal diet a normal water only
fasting would do and if you eat diets
that have very low carbohydrates in
restricted amounts blood sugar goes down
and ketones go up so it was kind of a
calorie restricted fat diet
um fat you know you can eat avocados and
you could eat certain things that would
give you fats
and that seemed to manage epileptic
seizures and then of course in the 1930s
certain drugs uh came on that uh made it
a lot easier for patients say oh we have
a drug now that
um uh can do what a ketogenic diet does
so let's forget about the ketogenic
diets uh but Jim Abrams and his son
Charlie started the Charlie Foundation
um because Charlie was his son Charlie
Abrams was almost killed by by various
drugs and treatments that he was taking
when he could have done a ketogenic diet
so it was resurrected resurrected in the
late 90s by Jim Abrams and we were all
working on epilepsy and um we found no
no uncertain terms that this that
management of seizures was directly
linked to the blood glucose and uh the
difference between Cancer and epilepsy
is we really don't know
how uh ketogenic diets stop epileptic
seizures uh we know it changes the
energy metabolism of the brain but the
mechanisms the key the clear mechanism
is still under massive investigation and
it seems to work against a variety of
different epilepsy so some people
inherit an epilepsy some people get it
from a viral infection some people get
it from a bang on the head some people
get it from tumors it seems like a
ketogenic diet seems to reduce the
excitability of the brain in many
different interesting mechanisms which
are under investigation
uh but we do know that sometimes these
children that have see that have managed
seizures for quite a long time months
many months all of a sudden take one one
sip of a Coca-Cola or a fruit juice or
something spiking the blood sugar
leading to an explosive breakthrough
seizure which is very clear so I my
colleagues and I in the epilepsy field
knew this that how is it possible that
you could have a child managed with
seizures for such a long period of time
and all they have to do is take one sip
of a of a of a fruit juice or a bite of
a cupcake and and within minutes they're
blown up into a major uh a major seizure
so it was clear that you had to maintain
low blood sugar low stable blood sugar
to manage an epileptic seizure in cancer
we don't see an explosive growth of
cells uh as the result of taking a bite
out of a out of a cupcake uh or or a
sweet a a sugary drink you can't see it
you can't feel it but you know it's
happening uh because we know the cancer
cell can't live can't one of the
fermentable fuels is is glucose and and
and and sugar is is fructose glucose so
it's broken down so the glucose
immediately goes to the tumor cell and
is used to for the growth of the tumor
cell but you can't say well you know the
guy says I you know I've been ketogenic
diet I think I'm okay let me just bite
this can a cupcake you can't see whether
your tumor cell is going to be growing
like you can see a breakthrough
epileptic seizure it's very clear uh but
not not not a growing tumor so you just
have to know that to manage cancer you
have to keep that Sugar under control
and the second fuel is glutamine which
there's no diet and everybody keeps
asking me oh you know glutamine is so
healthy for us and all this and it is uh
people need to know that that
glutamine is not a risk factor for
cancer glucoses for for creating
inflammation but not glutamine so you
need specific drugs to Target the
glutamine for cancer you can't you can't
do it with any diet people oh I I oh you
know I take glutamine for weight lifting
and all this other stuff it's great if
you don't have cancer don't worry about
it so um so glutamine is an important
metabolite so to connect the dots just
like I did earlier with cancer and
really talking about in a way to look at
cancer as a survival mechanism as a cell
we see it as this destructive disease
which it absolutely is and it causes
Havoc for people but from a biological
level this is just a cell trying to
survive so it's tapping into an old
evolutionary pathway which is this
fermentation process so to bring that
same sort of thinking over to these two
fuel sources fuel sources for cancer
specifically glucose really what you're
saying if I understand correctly please
correct me if I'm wrong is that a
ketogenic diet as a therapeutic approach
to cancer in a way is cutting off the
fuel source that is used in this
fermentation process so still providing
fuel for our healthy cells but taking
away the primary fuel sources that
cancer uses to grow and grow rapidly
inside of the body is that a correct
understanding yes yes and and the second
part you said is absolutely essential
they have to know that the Ketone bodies
from the ketogenic diets are serving as
fuel sources for the normal
non-cancerous cells in our body actually
making them even healthier than they
were
um there's another interesting
biochemical mechanism by which burning
ketones uh enhances the health and
vitality and Energy Efficiency of normal
cells
um uh so that's that's one issue that is
the normal cells burning Ketone bodies
get healthier when on that's that that's
why one of the health benefits of
ketogenic diet I hate to say a ketogenic
diet
um
because it is it is that but it's more
than that
um it's it's a General Health uh uh
it's a it's a health system for the body
right because there's some stress
response is a major part of it as you've
talked about there's many other things
yeah it's not just that we're going to
throw this one diet although diet is a
key part of removing the fuel source of
cancer in your work and approach but
this is a whole system and maybe when we
have a few minutes here in a little bit
we can talk about what the whole system
is yeah well I think you're right I mean
you have to break it down into its
various parts right so
um you know the the and and ketosis in a
diet can be achieved uh with carnivore
diets Mediterranean diets uh even vegan
diets although not as effective but they
can still uh generate a state of ketosis
uh which is then putting pressure uh uh
help making the normal cells healthy fee
while at the same time restricting the
fuel that's absolutely required for the
growth of the tumor so again you have to
bring the body into a more metabolically
stabilized State once you get it once
the body is into that state then you can
then use low doses of various kinds of
drugs and procedures that will work
synergistically with this new ketotic
state making these tumor cells more and
more vulnerable to death by putting them
under metabolic stress and that stress
is enhancing the health the healthy
cells of the body while slowly degrading
and eliminating of the tumor cells right
it's not that you're out there
somebody's saying that oh you know just
by cutting off the fuel source these
cells are going to die no there might
need to be approaches like drugs and
there's a lot of great ones that are out
there and we're lucky through modern
medicine to have access to them but
there could be a protocol to introduce
low amounts that then can actually kill
the cancer depending on what type of
cancer people are dealing with yeah and
some of these drugs you know can be used
in very low concentrations because the
the tumor cells now when they're under
this metabolic stress become extremely
vulnerable to killing so we're not
saying we can throw out all these
chemotherapies and all this other kinds
of stuff we just need to know how to use
it more effectively and in the right way
so that a patient can just take a small
dose of this stuff when the body is in
ketosis and then eliminate the tumor
without toxicity
um we know this so so that's why uh some
of my colleagues in the clinic in
Istanbul are using very low chemo drugs
together with ketogenic metabolic
therapy it's a process by which we're
both enhancing the health and vitality
of the normal cells while slowly
degrading tumor cells without producing
significant toxicity in the rest of the
body it's a beautiful strategy you just
got to know know about it you have to
understand why what you're doing why
you're doing it and you have to
understand the nature of the biological
processes which makes this metabolic
approach the most logical and likely
that will be the most effective way to
manage cancer for the majority of tumors
so we'll get into the challenge with the
way that clinical trials are done today
because the question always from the
people that are in the medical field are
always like well where's the evidence
where's the evidence and usually they're
talking about these randomized you know
placebo-controlled trials we're going to
get to that in a second but first let's
talk about at least
your studies of what you've shown in
mice and then also I do believe that
you've collected case studies that are
out there do you have case studies in
um I've seen the ones that are there in
animals do you also have case studies in
humans showing that when you starve the
cancer and then also use these uh
low-dose
concentrations of drugs to kill the
cancer that people can ultimately
radically slow down or even you know
kill off the cancer that they're dealing
with yeah yeah I mean I mean this is uh
this is this is the strategy you know to
slow to slow the whole tumor down and
degrade it and degrade it uh very slowly
so and have you and your team collected
case studies together of different
groups that are out there it's still
emerging and obviously that's one of the
big problems with this is that it's not
like MD Anderson or the you know here in
UCLA in Los Angeles is practicing this
new approach this is sort of a whole new
approach to cancer in itself but what
documentation do we have at least right
now before we get into clinical trials
okay we base it on two two things before
you you have to have
a logical mechanism of action for doing
something uh in other words there has to
be there has to be a scientific basis
for why you would do why you would uh do
a trial in the first place okay why you
would treat a human a mouse a dog or
whatever it has to be some what do you
just grab something off the shelf and
you know chug it down maybe you know
maybe that that that solution over there
might well no no there's no mechanism we
we in Warburg have others have clearly
defined what the underlying process of
the tumor cell is right we know that
from the from the pre-clinical studies
from the cell culture studies we we know
that we know the mech we know what's
driving the cell so now to do take a
human being that has a tumor and you say
we're going to now based on our
understanding of the scientific
mechanisms that are responsible for your
dysregulated cell growth we will now
Institute a therapeutic approach
designed to Target that process and when
we do that we get really good results
the problem is you cannot take 50 people
and do this because you you need to know
each person you have to know that
person's metabolism you have to know
that person's sex age you have to know
what other conditions in that individual
are there that need to be addressed
before you can start doing this stuff
before you can start treating a patient
with ketogenic metabolic therapy does
that person have parasites does that
person have type 2 diabetes hypertension
there's a whole variety of things that
have to be evaluated up front before you
can then elicit a a therapeutic strategy
for managing that person's uh situation
so you need to do a very comprehensive
blood work on that individual and you so
you can take 20 individuals and every
all 20 may have a different profile of
blood markers and things so you might
have to ease one person in a little bit
differently than a than another person
you need to try to manage uh as best you
can bring that person into a new
metabolic State then once that person is
in a metabolic State then you can follow
the look at non-invasive uh strategies
for management managing his tumor what
is that CAT scan pet scan these kinds of
non-invasive ways to determine whether
or not the individual's tumor is showing
some level of response to the treatment
that you're that you're using then once
you have that look the tumor becomes
somewhat stabilized uh then you can then
introduce very low doses of certain uh
drugs that are known to act act
synergistically uh with the diet or with
the the new metabolic homeostatic State
drugs that will Target the glycolysis
the glucose utilizing pathway drugs that
Target the glutamine utilizing pathway
and they would be delivered in pulses
and they would not be delivered in great
excess amounts because they're working
synergistically how does the number one
how does the patient how do you ask the
guy how are you feeling today I feel
great what are you guys doing so so I
said well that's good that's a good
that's a good good first step so we
can't people where's the evidence what
are you going to do take 100 people and
just you know throw throw something at
them that they you have no clue you
understand the biology you don't
understand you gotta you gotta we work
with small numbers of people individual
case reports and then we publish those
case reports and then we look at what
worked for this person what worked for
that person and then we we can start to
get some sort of a strategy together so
the answer to why are there's no major
clinical trials there are most of them
are not done correctly because the
people doing them are don't have an
understanding of the biochemistry that's
re that's underlying this so I I I I
don't fault them because a lot of people
themselves would like to be treated with
metabolic therapy uh the problem is that
the the the the the the the practice
practitioners the Physicians
don't always have the necessary
background or understanding of what they
are supposed to do how to do it and how
to measure outcomes we're in the process
right now of writing a very
comprehensive uh treatment protocol for
managing glioblastoma which is the one
of the most deadly and unmanageable
cancers that that we know about today we
have a very comprehensive strategy for
managing this kind of a tumor can it be
done that's another thing oh we have
this tremendous uh treatment protocol
for glioblastoma but nobody will use it
and the answer is how could that be
because we have the science behind it we
know from pre-clinical
research from our pre-clinical research
that it will be very effective we have
individuals case reports knowing that it
will be effective why can't it be used
in in like the major major uh oncology
centers because they need to have the
standard of care done for first and I
told them I says they they so we have we
have we have to have the groups of
people okay we have one group of people
get the standard of care uh 90 of them
are dead before five years more okay
then we have metabolic therapy used with
the standard of care okay so we're
starting to see these folks doing a
little bit better than standard of Care
by itself well where is metabolic
therapy by itself without radiation and
chemo ah can't do that no not allowed
not allowed to be done at any of the
major medical centers the border the the
IRB institutional review board has nixed
those kinds of stuff because they would
say that it's you're basically you're
harming the patient because you're not
following what we've established to be
the standard of care which comes from
the fact that hey cancer is a genetic
disease not a metabolic condition right
not a metabolically driven well it comes
from the eye it comes from the ideology
not only that cancer is a metabolic
disease but their complete lack of
understanding of the of what their
actual standard of care treatments are
actually doing to contribute to the
rapid growth of the tumor in the brain
so as I have published very clearly over
and over again when you irradiate
somebody's brain with a tumor in it you
explode the amount of glutamine in that
micro environment giving those tumor
cells an absolute uh
a bouquet of growth factors and fuels to
grow out of control so so uh you you
create a mush in the brain you give the
patient high dose steroids to control
the swelling of the brain from the
radiation heat steroids are like
drinking Coca-Cola they make your blood
sugar go up to very high levels so so
what are you doing the very treatment
that you're throwing at these poor folks
is contributing to the recurrence and
the death of the patients and I've said
that over and over again why no why
there's so little survival for
glioblastoma in every Major Medical
Center in the world it's so consistent
that people are all Dead Before 40
months not all you get very rare
survivors occasionally almost everybody
in 10 years is dead for sure
um what are you doing I said that's the
worst thing you can possibly do to
somebody with a brain tumor is irradiate
them and yet they continue to do it and
one has to say to these guys what's
wrong with you don't you what do you
ignore the scientific evidence
what are you doing to these poor folks
I've clearly shown that that's what's
killing creating the recurrence of the
tumor and killing the patients why
because it frees up massive amounts of
the two fermentable fuels needed by the
that's the science behind it you got to
understand the science behind what's
going on and it makes perfect sense why
these folks are not surviving they come
they look like they're doing well for a
while and then all of a sudden that
tumor comes back like a Raging Bull and
the the liquefication of the brain from
the radiation uh it's just like it's
tragic it's it's it's it's it's it's
it's malpractice as far as I'm concerned
you know to do something like that it'd
be one thing if there wasn't any
evidence
it'd be one thing to say well this is
the best we can do but when I publish
evidence and I clearly show that that
treatment is responsible for the demise
of the majority of these brain cancer
patients it's criminal to be doing
something like this I'm telling you man
this is like nuts and you know people
are saying that oh you know it's hard to
reproduce science there's nothing you
should see how reproducible the death
the death of the cancer patient is you
can't design better experiments for
reproducibility than how fast standard
of care kills GBM patients that's
terrible is that terrible to say
something like that it's terrible well
why does the patient go look at the data
in the literature it's not coming from
my mouth it's coming from the data from
the from the top medical schools yeah I
mean I get me the audience everybody
listening here they can feel your
passion for what well you know when you
see enough of this when you see enough
of this crazy for as long as I have
Mercedes said what am I going maybe I'm
going nuts
it's basically you're being you know
your work and research as being you know
I the phrases are overused but it's
being gaslit by the medical profession
many of them again under that sort of
this is the consensus that's already
been established you can't question it
until unfortunately we're in a situation
where
Jethro why don't you get one of these
guys from the top medical school and ask
them why the hell are you radiating your
patients don't you know it's killing
them all go ask them that see what kind
of response you get yeah you probably
won't even want to come on your show
they they wouldn't want to come on for
sure for sure but I gotta ask them these
questions because I'm certainly asking
them no we do it's important and I think
like you said earlier
the ground swell is coming from the lay
people who are hearing are interested in
hearing directly from sources like
yourself this is why you know podcasts
around the world have really taken off
because people want to hear the full
story and they want to get a chance to
decide if they want to investigate
something and they want to weigh the
pros and cons of looking at stuff here's
the here's the problem I I can I can say
all this stuff because I have done the
basic research myself I have looked into
the concepts I have studied these
Concepts the problem and the great
tragedy is when the cancer patient with
the glioblastoma lung cancer breast
cancer whatever it is they go to the top
medical schools and they tell them I
want metabolic therapy and they oh we
can't do that here because there's no
evidence that it works
um so these poor folks are now hear what
I say they get all fired up they go down
to the top medical school to say I want
metabolic therapy well we don't do that
here well who does oh I'm going to lose
my license if I do that what the hell is
going on with that stuff so I feel bad
when they say whoa where's sea Freed's
Clinic I don't have a clinic I'm not an
MD I don't run I don't treat patients
um why are there no clinics well because
a lot of the folks that would need to be
doing this uh could lose their license
if they treat patients without the
standard of care so why is the standard
of care written in Granite why can't it
be modified in some way where the
medical schools they should be the ones
Dana Farber MD Anderson Sloan Kettering
the Moffett the Fred Hutch all of these
major Cancer Centers throughout the
country should be the ones that are
doing this why are they not doing it
that's the question yeah
you know what's that famous uh Max is it
Max Planck quote from the German uh
Nobel uh Prize winner winner the
theoretical physicist uh I'll paraphrase
here but advances in science and you
could extrapolate to medicine too uh you
know it advances in science happen won a
funeral at a time because it's very hard
to get the old guard interested in doing
things that has them completely
re-question their core and basic
understanding well yeah but then we have
to get rid of those well okay well
that's good in concept but we're
allowing people to die I mean it's not
like this is an insignificant thing it's
a very true
we have almost 1 700 people a day dying
from cancer right and we have to wait
for these guys that can't understand the
basic concepts to die off before we're
what we allow these poor folks that
could be alive that could be doing
better for a bunch of people that are
staying in the way because they they
either don't want to know about this or
they can't understand it I mean this is
tragedy so I mean so what are you going
to do uh there has to come from the folk
the people themselves they're the ones
that are going to be affected by this so
they have to demand they they people
themselves have to demand they want
metabolic therapy for crying out loud
and if they don't do what somebody else
has to do put pressure on the
congressman that put pressure on the
Senators and then President Biden
himself says oh we want to we want to
bring cancer to death we could do that
in five years not 25 five years it's
just that he's I don't know what he
unfortunately he's not any different
from the rest of the folks they just
can't understand uh the metabolic
therapy that the understanding the
science behind it and they keep
gravitating towards moonshot stuff and
and car T immunotherapy and all that
stuff is based on the somatic mutation
theory of cancer if the somatic mutation
theory of cancer is not correct what is
the probability of reducing the death
rate from cancer is that not going to
happen so uh you got to realize man it's
a totally different kind of disease it
needs a completely different strategy
well why we have people listening here
and a big part of their activism is
making sure they have the education to
understand and connect the dots give us
a sense you know we didn't fully connect
the dots for people you know you're
talking about glucose as one of the
primary fuel sources of cancer give us a
diagnosis of our current modern
industrialized lifestyle and really
helped the folks that are listening
today connect the dots of what are the
primary sources of you know large
amounts of calories containing glucose
inside of our our lifestyle and also
let's get into you know beyond diet
let's just talk a little bit about you
know sedentary lifestyle and the amount
of stress that's there and how those
things play into it as well well now
we're back on the prevention side so all
of those things that you just mentioned
are critical for preventing cancer from
happening in the first place I mean
we're only concerned about treating it
after you have cancer but if you don't
have cancer you don't have to ever worry
about the kinds of treatments or if you
can live a diet and lifestyle that would
put keep your mitochondria healthy so
that you don't get a transition from
oxfast to fermentation then the
probability of getting cancer will be
significantly reduced so but this is the
this is the the balance act you have to
you have to recognize how do we know
that how do I how do we know that if we
have the right diet and lifestyle that
we will significantly reduce our risk
forever having to deal with cancer in
the first place and we know that from
our historic evaluation of tribes human
tribes that live according to their uh
ancient ways and there have been a
number of people who have investigated
Aboriginal peoples uh these are peoples
who still live in uh non-western side
they're they're in jungles or they're in
desert or they're in the the
Arctic modern day hunter-gatherer tribes
yeah like in a wits from from Canada and
Alaska you you have well now today
they're massively unhealthy when they
want alcohol today but it wasn't that
way yeah yeah so those TR those those
folks uh were living in fact they were
comments that you know Inuits Eskimos uh
never get cancer and they eat you know
fatty blubber and they eat whales and
they eat seals and they eat fish and
they eat this kind of stuff and they
don't eat many vegetables because you
know where you're going to go and when
it's 40 below zero to get to get a piece
of fruit but but in in the summer
certainly they they could gather some of
these things up
um but uh the great physician
humanitarian Albert Schweitzer uh
recorded the African tribes uh had no
cancer and he looked for 404 40 000
people were evaluating couldn't find any
cancer so what are these guys doing they
were pretty much following a very every
exercise very a lot of physical exercise
uh very low carbohydrate foods that they
were eating
um and they had a very different
um
the the diets and Lifestyles so during
the Paleolithic period of our past uh
you know where did we we didn't Farm we
went we were hunter-gatherers Hunter
what does that mean hunter you're
killing stuff and eating it you're
Gathering nuts and berries whenever you
could seasonally uh every we we now know
from from from research most of those
folks were always in a state of ketosis
um what we call Nutritional ketosis
where blood sugars are low and ketones
are elevated because there's no
carbohydrates very few carbohydrates in
our diets you don't get much
carbohydrate eating eating organic meat
internal organs you don't get much
carbohydrates eating natural
um you could get a little bit from
berries but they'd be seasonal so you
don't really yeah I mean but you're
you're not you're not farming them so
the Neolithic period is when
civilization started basically when we
started farming and growing food in a a
cons in a location where people would
gather around the food but even then
there was a lot of exercise and the
kinds of foods that we Wheats and corns
and rice and this kind of stuff they
were not high glycemic varieties of
these Foods we have now made super sweet
rice corn Wheats and now we've even
processed them into called highly
processed carbohydrates with Zero
nutritional benefit all high
carbohydrate and uh this this with a
with a diet lifestyle that we have today
is absolutely the resp the cause of
almost all of our chronic diseases what
are they
type 2 diabetes obesity cardiovascular
disease cancer dementia these are all
related to diet lifestyle yeah there's a
few guys that might have a genetic
predisposition to one of these things or
another but the majority of the folks
it's ourselves and you know people blame
our genes uh oh you know it's not our
genes are doing exactly what they evolve
to do store energy we we evolved as a
species that was hungry all the time we
we were always tracking down food to get
to to find out we needed to store energy
it's hard to store energy when you're
eating only meats and certain vegetables
that have very very few uh highly
processed carbs so now you take that
same metabolism and you throw it into a
new environment where you have massive
amounts of Highly processed
carbohydrates minimal amounts of
exercise and energy and you get fat all
right because we evolved to store energy
and the genes that allowed us to survive
on the planet as a species are now
counterproductive to our health because
we're in a totally new environment
killing us and causing an enormous
amount of our net our financial
resources to be thrown into managing
chronic diseases all most of which are
caused by a diet and minimal exercise uh
and and ex and consumption of Highly
processed foods and it's convenient okay
how many people are sitting in traffic
jams in every major city in this country
Rush Hour you're sitting in traffic jams
you're you're sucking down on a high
carbohydrate coffee a muffin you're
driving the car you get into work you
sit in front of a computer you run home
the kids are crying you're going to put
some something in the microwave real
quick that's highly processed you give
it to the kids you get childhood obesity
you get chronic diseases and you start
creating all these problems that were
very new to our uh our society and now
you're going to come out with billions
of dollars trying to figure out how how
I'm going to stop obesity how I'm going
to stop type 2 Diet diabetes I'm going
to stop cancer what am I doing about
dementia chronic and and
we're we're not taking charge of what we
know we should be doing so we have a
institutions will come in and say oh
take that pill take this pill we're
going to treat you with this and treat
you with that but the real cause of it
all you got to go back to prevention
okay and it's hard I'm not saying this
is easy I mean the way we're running our
society today everybody's on the go all
the time everybody's just locked into a
computer with the headsets walking
around with headsets on uh I mean I mean
we're just deviated so far uh in a short
period of time you know a few hundred
years into this new environment and it's
accelerating and massively accelerating
uh with the with the technology that we
have making our lives easier and easier
putting us at more and more risk for
chronic diseases and and then you end up
with cancer and then you're trying to
figure oh what's this cancer you know
the dementia man what's all the that's
another epidemic obesity is an epidemic
dementia is an epidemic cancer is an
epidemic and it's all coming from
changes rapid changes in our diet and
lifestyle over the last over the last uh
you know several several decades well
you chatted about diet and I want to
just clarify a couple points there to
make sure you know that our audience
obviously we've done a lot of episodes
on diet it's not that you're saying that
you know obviously carbohydrates and
sugar can't be a part of a healthy diet
we're really talking about getting those
sources from Whole Foods and making sure
that our calorie total calories from
those sources are stayed within reason
which generally if you avoid Ultra
processed foods especially high fructose
sweetened you know drinks you know Ultra
concentrated fruit juices things like
that fast food if you're generally going
to stay away from that and eat and focus
on Whole Foods and good amount of
protein you're gonna be okay with the
combination of not having a sedentary
lifestyle would you agree
well I think it's also the fast food
industry as well I mean you gotta you
gotta you got to recognize how tasty
those things are I mean this is like I
mean we evolved to want glucose we
evolved as a species to like sweet
things and now we have so much of it
everywhere I mean you take some of those
Subway sandwiches or whatever the you
know these uh whatever whatever these
big hero sandwiches I mean they've got
so much sugar in the bread you can't
call it bread right so they have to call
it a pastry a confectionary
um I mean that's not natural but it man
does it taste good it's unbelievable you
ever have a McDonald's Quarter Pounder
yet you tremble while you eat it so damn
good I mean it's not like we're making
foods that people oh I don't want to eat
that oh you kidding me I mean that stuff
is really good stuff I mean you wash it
down with a big milkshake I mean
you gotta love it right you get those
new Domino's Pizzas I mean they're full
of sugar in the in the tomato sauce I
mean the bread's full of sugar
everything is full of sugar but man does
it tastes good because we evolve to like
that stuff so it's not like because it
was rare it was hard to find yes and you
know and then you divide then you our
technology allows us to make uh sugary
we found a mutation in corn years ago
the the sugary Gene so uh the corn
kernels could make a lot more sugar and
then you can make sweet corn right
so so everything is sweet sweet and then
you process in the highly Frank I I
those corn syrups and you mix that in
with everything else you're eating and
and every it's not like this stuff
doesn't taste good man this stuff is
really really tasty sure which is why
it's so hard to take a step back from it
yeah it does take some level of personal
yeah you know willpower to pull back
especially if we're addicted but I will
say The Temptations The Temptations are
everywhere The Temptations are
everywhere but your taste buds do change
when you start to shift away from a lot
of those foods and I want to say for
anybody who's struggling with it a
hundred percent it's hard and you start
to Crave whole and healthy foods it
doesn't mean that I don't like sweets
just like the other other person that's
around there but your tolerance for them
shifts and also
Tony Robbins used to say this back in
the day but nothing tastes as good as
being healthy feels when you feel great
because your sleep is great now diet is
tough and it's one of those things that
a lot of people struggle with and you
have to find the diet that you can stick
to and you manage calories and make sure
you don't overeat right and there's a
lot of different diets that can work
there one thing I do want to highlight
on is that this is also tough but this
does feel like it's a good insurance
policy this is from the work of Sachin
Panda one of the top researchers in sort
of uh circadian rhythm and he shared
this uh paper the other day looking at
uh the role of exercise it was titled
the role of exercise and obesity related
cancers I'll share it over with uh with
you the current evidence in biological
mechanisms and essentially he shared
this graphic on Twitter and it was
basically saying that exercise is the
best one of the best insurances against
cancer and the premium just from the
evidence what we have today is that 30
minutes a day of wedding genuinely makes
a difference would you agree for a lot
of people that in the category of
prevention one of the top things they
can do today in addition to the stuff
that we talk about diet which of course
is Hard Exercise hard too but anybody
can start to get more exercise in their
life and that will also help them in the
prevention against cancer
yeah I agree anything that you feel that
is you found is a you know uh supportive
for you and your lifestyle well yeah I I
think you know uh
well I'm at a university where all the
kids are young and uh they're in the gym
jumping around they all want to look
like the Adonis you know they're they're
their perfect bodies they're they're
just like I said put 50 years in and
life on those bodies and see what
happens
but but no I I agree but I but I think
um you know walking is probably one of
the best exercises yeah walking is
walking is easy because you don't you
don't have to go to a gym uh you can
just walk around the block or walk
around a reservoir or walk around
something uh swim a guy go I want us
people want to swim swimming is
excellent but you know you got to go to
a swimming pool somewhere I mean you're
working in an office and now you have to
go somewhere uh get into a bathing suit
uh swim around put your clothes back on
and then I mean walking you don't you
can just you know go out and and do uh
just walk around it's a good way to
clear your mind it's a good way to start
to focus on on things that you may not
have been able to focus on uh while you
were working at the desk and doing your
work
um you know and it depends on the kind
of of work you're doing I mean
construction workers of course are
outside and they're they're they have a
lot more activity than some office
workers say but but we're all we're all
in the same environment
um and and we're all challenged by by by
the same issues uh you know how how are
we going to try to prevent again uh
cancer uh also obesity because all these
things are are linked you know uh with
the smoke anti-smoking campaign obesity
now has moved into into a a high risk
factor for cancer but obesity is also
linked to type 2 diabetes which is
another epidemic uh well all of that's
related to elevated blood sugar and lack
of exercise so you can break it all down
to blood sugar and exercise if your
blood glucose levels are too high and
you don't exercise I mean you're going
to get fat and you're going to put
yourself at risk for systemic
inflammation the the tragedy the great
tragedy I see
is is the little kids
uh that are adolescents uh that are that
are pre-teens are are getting obese
um this should never happen that because
those poor folks are already are
shutting their their long-term longevity
down they're going to be dead in their
40s and 50s they're not going to be
lived to be 70 and 80. they're all going
to be dead soon not all but a lot of
them are going to die prematurely uh
from this and they don't think there's a
problem with this and we can't never
allow our society to think it's okay to
see a little kid that's obese it's not
okay okay because that unless you don't
care about you know health issues and
then you know as you age you put on
weight uh mainly because you're not as
active as you were when you were young
and the hormones in your body that burn
energy become less and less and you
start to store to store fat so so I mean
it's a lifestyle change but man it's
it's it's really cutting the life it's
really reducing overall survival
for a lot of people in our in our
society and they're saying that some of
the kids today being born are never are
not going to live as long as some of the
the their grandparents say say for
example yeah so you have a lot of this
that has to do uh but again you know
we're focusing on cancer uh which is a
real deadly uh a type of of situation
that causes a tremendous amount of
stress on people and uh we can manage
that I think we can do a better job than
we're doing right now yeah sleep is
important obviously there's been a lot
that's written on the topic of sleep
when it comes to Lifestyle and how
important that is when it comes to
maintaining good metabolic Health in the
prevention category I would be uh sad if
we didn't at least mention that not that
we have to go too deep into it but sleep
you know stress reduction exercise and a
lot of people who are trying to get
their you know blood sugar under control
and they're especially for my audience
that's listening less so on YouTube more
on the podcast or on the audio you know
they're trying to dial into the perfect
diet just by signifi efficiently putting
attention into strength training or even
being serious about walking you know and
getting those 10 000 steps in a day they
can see dramatically huge improvements
in their blood glucose just by including
an X well you know ten thousand steps a
day is is is I mean you've got to be
doing a lot of walking to get ten
thousand steps I know but it's doable
right it's like oh yeah we have to in
New York City you walk from one side of
the the island to the other I mean
you're going to get a lot of steps but
some people don't are sitting in cars in
traffic and uh to get 10 000 steps
you're going to have to you're going to
have to take a chunk of your of your day
I agree with you uh you have to have a
job that's going to give you that
opportunity to take ten thousand steps
for sure um and that's and that's the
kind of steps that you get
cardiovascular exercise exercise from as
well yeah because some people can walk
back and forth
and never really get their body into a
rhythm yeah and it's it's all hard and
part of this is that if you're a
business owner or somebody that employs
people you want to be thinking about how
can you even create a work environment
that's more flexible and allows
individuals of course people are doing
walking desks and other things but the
whole thing is hard diet's hard dialing
in your sleep is Hard Exercise is hard
the whole thing is hard but guess what's
really hard is cancer is also getting
cancer is also really hard yeah and and
and also people like the easy way out
this is just part of our nature that's
why ozampic the pill for losing uh fat
right there was a diabetic drug
everybody a lot of people now are using
it to lose weight they're not you don't
have to suffer through uh Weight
Watchers and all these kinds of special
diets just Just Jack yourself up with
those elephants
I mean you see how many how many people
are doing it it just tells you who are
who we are as a species we don't want to
walk we want to just inject ourselves
with those impact lose the weight so we
can look good
well let me ask you about it right
that's who we are right that's who we
are we you know we've done a few
episodes where different people have had
shared their take on something like
ozempic right and obviously this is a
podcast it's all about really embracing
you know diet lifestyle factors that are
there but if somebody was considering
something like ozembic and there's a
other you know glp I forgot exactly what
they're called glp uh uh anyways if that
was going to significantly help somebody
reduce weight now there's a bunch of
other concerns like long-term side
effects which we don't know also the
loss you know Peter or Tia writing about
the loss of lean muscle mass which is an
important part of helping you keep your
blood glucose under control but let's
say if that was one of the solutions
that was available to them besides the
fact that they have to be on it for the
rest of their life otherwise they're
going to gain back the weight would you
see that as one of the tools in the
toolbox to lower our risk of cancer
since obesity is so directly you know
correlated with with uh obesity and
cancer have that correlation that's
there yeah I can't speak to that I
haven't tested ozampic in my in my uh
cancer models yeah so uh I can't really
uh I I I I talk only a lot of what I've
researched and what I've done in the lab
sure I appreciate that yeah I thought
you because you brought it up I was
gonna ask you about it no but I brought
it up because I know members of our
species would love to do things that
don't require too much effort on their
part a pill The Taking of a pill uh why
why should I have to do a ketogenic diet
when I can take a pill in fact we've
always talked about the ketogenic diet
in a pill and uh for the epilepsy you
know my my friend John Rowe uh who Who
had who had gave a big lecture one time
on on can we find a ketogenic diet on a
pill and because why should we have to
suffer eating foods that may not be
palatable just so we can have this
health benefit but uh I I think this is
the easy way out
uh you know do you want do you want to
do you want to do prevent cancer do you
want to treat cancer by doing metabolic
therapy or is it just simply easier for
you to go into the into the into the
oncology Ward uh sit down in a lounge
chair and have someone Infuse a
poisonous chemical into your veins or
sitting in a chair and have them mark an
area on your body where they can zap you
with a radiation uh that's a hell of a
lot easier uh than doing the kinds of
things that would also manage the
disease but it's going to require a
significant input uh and uh activity on
your part so there's those who want to
be participatory in their health and
those that people who don't want to be
participatory in their health and I just
want to don't have the resources or are
in a situation where they literally are
working three or four jobs and they
can't think and that's obviously now
where we get back to this idea of you
know of course there's personal
responsibility for everybody who's
listening today who probably more likely
than not has some resources to make some
changes in their life but really if we
want to be able to get this out to
everybody you know we're going to have
to have major institutions and
potentially the government really
fundamentally having a completely
different approach to Health in society
I'm not holding my breath for that to
happen but that's going to have to
happen otherwise well we have a split in
society there's a whole group of people
that are getting a lot healthier which
is a very small percentage of the
population and there's a whole group of
people that are getting super unhealthy
very quickly yes and I think well I mean
this is the thing people need to know
what's putting them at risk and a lot of
times they do know but they really don't
have the resources not to do what
they're doing so it's really it's really
um
I know it's it's a tough question it's a
it's a tough situation well I want to
move out of prevention for a second and
go back to people that are diagnosed
with cancer looking for resources you
know you mentioned a clinic that you're
aware of in Istanbul and I know that
there's these different clinics that are
spread around the world obviously a lot
of them are not going to be accepting
American Insurance and things like that
are those clinics a potential option you
know I'm not going to name any by name
unless if there's any ones that you feel
comfortable to name I know there's some
in Mexico some places that use you know
water only fasting I'm not aware of
anybody that's implementing the specific
approach that you're taking but are more
aware of therapeutic approaches like the
ketogenic diet you know clinics in
Germany are those an option again
potentially for people who have
resources who are diagnosed with cancer
yeah I think so but but again uh we're
working on the treatment protocol now
and and hopefully we can get it
published which is a really
comprehensive way and we put together
with people my friends and people I know
in the field who have studied this for
quite a long period of time who are all
going to be making comments and and
signing off on this strategy and until
you have to have a protocol for
treatment that you have to have two
things you have to have a correct
protocol for treatment and you have to
have a place where you can go to get the
treatment
so I think the frustrating part right
now from many of the comments that I get
from these podcasts is oh I talked at
all but where do we go you know nobody's
I I've outlined what we need to do but
who's going to do that for me who can
help me do that I I'm not a physician
people are calling me all these phone
calls that I'm getting they're they're
all asking you know where do I go how do
I do it where's well that should be your
major oncology centers uh it should be
should be the one well they're not doing
it and so even the clinics that are
publishing some of these case reports as
you've mentioned that you're working
together are all right those are
potential again most likely it's not
going to be covered by insurance and
people are going to have to have some
resources but would that be a potential
resource for people that had
resources I I think the time I think we
uh there are a number of people that are
really many Physicians that are are
would like to set up clinics uh
established you know brick and mortar
place to go where a patient would be
brought through follow through the
entire process by a team not handed off
like we do in the medical schools you
come in you get the diagnosis okay
you're handed off to the next guy who
does the treatment then you're handed
off to this other guy you like to have a
team that follows you from start to
finish knowing precisely how to deal
with the issues uh as you go through the
treatment process
um you know and and listen if I had
cancer
having written the protocol knowing
everybody that I know in the field and
knowing what I know I would certainly
want to work with one of my colleagues
just to bounce things off of I wouldn't
want to do everything even though I know
what to do and how to do it I still want
to talk to One a knowledgeable person
just to run things by them you know it's
like anything uh you really want to work
you really want to speak to somebody
just to make sure that the newest
evidence the newest discussions and
things that you might not have been
recognized uh might not have recognized
and I think the cancer patients who may
not have any uh wherewithal in this
whole thing would certainly need
guidance and uh an app so we're trying
to build apps where a lot of the patient
can do can play a very significant role
in their Health Management uh knowing
that they're shouldering a lot of what
needs to be done but they would like to
share their glucose Ketone index values
uh with the trained professional and
have that trained professional if they
fall out of the the nutritional
guideline or I should say the key the
The Zone what we call the therapeutic
zone of of efficacy uh what what how do
we get back into the Zone what did you
do to fall out of the zone and they
could say I did this and well okay
modify that modify this get yourself
back into the Zone that's why we built
the glucose Ketone index calculator to
allow cancer patients to know what
nutritional Zone they should be in to
create the greatest amount of pressure
on stopping the fermentation of their
tumor so and then I realized after we
did this how hard it was for the cancer
patients to get into these zones and and
I was working looking at the students
that could easily get into these zones
these are young people that have no
cancer no they're all very healthy and
they can get into these zones uh quite
easily but when you're an older person
with cancer and now you're subjected to
chemo and you're subjected to these
treatments your blood sugars go up your
systemic inflammation goes up and now it
becomes a real challenge for these
cancer folks to get into these zones
which initially I thought were were
quite achievable but now I'm realizing
steroids and all kinds of stuff that
you're given to the cancer patient keeps
them out of the zone and they're
struggling and they're oh I've done this
and I've done that and I can and and a
lot of the treatments they have are
pushing them out of these zones so you
know when we did it with the
pre-clinical system we were not
radiating and giving toxic poisons to
these mice I mean we got these animals
in these zones and all this kind of
stuff pretty quick so and dogs too I
mean I published a big paper on the dog
diet alone resolve this mast cell tumor
so um so it's much easier uh to do it if
you're kind of healthy at the beginning
it's much more difficult to get into the
Zone when you're when you're not healthy
is or is early detection also a big part
of this too and there's uh you know a
bunch of new things that are out there
everything from like Grails blood
testing which obviously is super
sensitive and you gotta be aware of that
and work with the right practitioner on
it to things like uh whole body scans
like uh I think there's a company called
I have no affiliation with them but like
pernova who are doing whole body scans
and they're able to detect a lot of
these because generally from what I
understand and people like Physicians
like Peter attia you've been on his
podcast before you guys had a really
good discussion and and a lot of he he
stress tests a lot of your ideas in a
good way and you had great responses for
them we'll link to that in the show
notes are those a part of the process
again well I I think yeah I think I
think when you come to I like the idea
of non-invasive detection non-invasive
men talk about that because you have a
whole philosophy V on on invasive versus
non-invasive yeah well I think well it's
a very Cutting Edge thing and I think
you know the industries are working on
what we call Liquid biopsy right uh
where we can where we can try to
identify where and what type of cancer a
person may have by by looking at markers
in the bloodstream so you just need to
take some blood evaluate the a whole
array of markers and then predict what
type of cancer it might be where it
might be and then do a more a more
thorough evaluation without actually
disturbing the micro environment of of
the tumor itself
um because right now we do we do a
tissue by many times not always but we
do tissue biopsy right somebody feels a
woman feels a lump on her breast or yeah
yeah and then goes in and says is this
cancer so not so then they're going to
be taking a biopsy with a needle well
yes and or a mass on the lung uh a mass
somewhere you know we need to prostate
you know whatever whatever tissue
happens to be the tissue that's involved
uh a confirmatory diagnosis is involved
with a um a biopsy which is taking a
sample of the tissue uh uh analyzing it
under the microscope and saying whether
or not the cells look uh malignant or
not which is then the Judgment of the
pathologist making a decision about what
he sees uh under the microscope my my uh
recognition of seeing dozens and dozens
of studies and I have some of them
published in our breast cancer paper by
by taking the the biopsy you actually
disturb the micro environment of the
mass that you are evaluating and you
could actually create a make a bad
situation worse
um in in in taking looking at material
to determine whether or not you have a
malignancy or not and if it is if if it
were to be malignant uh that that that
mass that you see uh with CAT scan pet
scan or or lump feeling a lump and it
does happen to be malignant then
stabbing it would not be the best in the
best interest of the patient you run the
risk of cold inflammatory oncotaxis it's
a well-known phenomenon where cancer
cells can spread around the body by
disturbing the micro environment that
was one of the reasons they get rid of
the morsellation procedure for uterine
polyps they had this machine that would
grind up polyps and it was causing it in
some people metastatic cancer because
you ground up fragmented the tissue got
into the bloodstream and became
metastatic so this is the same thing you
got to be very very careful you don't
want to disturb the the micro
environment so what do you do well you
Institute metabolic therapy and you have
several things that can happen uh number
one it goes away completely number two
it gets smaller or doesn't grow anymore
and then you say whoa It's stabilized
okay then then consider the surgical
debulking completely uh because you
could then reduce the inflammation
around the mass which is key to not
spreading it if you can put the fire
inflammation is fire put the douse the
fire with metabolic therapy so it's not
so angry and the borders become sharper
and the surgeon can take the whole thing
out without worrying about spreading it
so uh so there's a lot of key strategies
that one could do to reduce risk of
spreading something that should not
should be manageable very at the very
beginning but they don't do that because
they are clueless as the uh the concept
of metabolic therapy as an upfront a
treatment for this so or an approach and
what I'm telling you is not oh you're
like Peter was saying oh you could cause
fear in a lot of people by saying that's
concerned I'm just telling you what the
biopsies yeah I'm just telling you it's
already been seen in scientific
literature right why don't the patient
oh and oh well of course Peter said that
oh it happens very rarely yeah like one
out of 200 people what about the the one
person who got it spread all over
because you took a biopsy on it and just
to connect the dots just make sure that
people don't people are not we're not
losing anybody is that you have a
concern that if people are going in with
these invasive biopsies that the fear is
that if you are disrupting that local
micro environment you you could have
cancer cells that get released from one
area let's say the breast tissue and
spread to other areas and then could
cancer then end up taking up in that
area that it's spread to and Peter attia
and again I'm not sophisticated enough
to ask all the follow-up questions I'm
not physician researcher I'm just a
layperson here interviewing but I would
encourage people to listen to that back
and forth that you had because you had
some great answers and your thing was
that still if it's rare potentially one
in 200 it could still happen and I
understand where Peter is coming from
too which is that his concern is that
well there you know are people just not
going to go seek out care and I
understand your answer to that which is
that in the ideal world if we had the
metabolic therapy approach to treating
cancer we would see that many more
people would get better just from that
alone yes absolutely absolutely and then
you could actually get rid of it much
more cleanly without causing any
reducing risk of spread so there's a lot
of ways that we can already reduce
uh cancer uh we're not arguing that we
need we need to have some diagnostic
procedures of course you have a lot of
things CAT scan MRI pet scans there's a
lot of different things you can do up
front well we can't do it this time we
have to do a biopsy first why what do
you need to do the biopsy you're
disturbing the micro environment well we
need to know if it's malignant well if
it's malignant you should never be
sticking it in the first place so so
because then you really increase the
potential risk uh for spreading the
cancer but shrink it down one question
for you so don't in the case of uh let's
say my mom who was diagnosed with the
breast cancer who's doing fantastic by
the way and her Approach at that time
I've talked about it before in previous
podcasts was we kind of had to assemble
a ragtag team of people we had to kind
of convince her oncologist she had a
functional medicine doctor who was
involved in her treatment who herself is
a breast cancer survivor Dr Elizabeth
Bohm and a few of the people that were
part of it in a cancer researcher named
Ralph Moss who has put together a lot of
different reports over the years and
that was a a big part of her you know
team and her approach but in the case
for her I believe when they did a biopsy
they found that her cancer was her too
positive and they also got a chance to
understand what uh drugs would be the
most supportive for that type of cancer
that she had is that not part of the
reason to potentially have a biopsy done
yeah I mean you certainly can do it but
we all we already know her two positive
triple negative or any of these things
they're all fermenters
regardless so so you're saying
regardless it wouldn't change the
approach of at least the metabolic
therapy no no you're still going to get
rid of it uh you're still going to
remove it it's just that you would want
to remove it in an indolent State rather
than in a potentially more uh aggressive
State
um you know there's a lot of lumps that
you can look at there's a lot of
different ways you can you can do this
the the idea of doing a metabolic
approach up front
reduces the risk of spread when you do
the surgical debulking so it's not and
then you can analyze it after the
surgical debulking if it's shrunken down
you can still look at it pathologically
and see what it looks like and in many
cases it becomes like oh this is not an
aggressive cancer well it could have
been if you took a biopsy from the very
beginning these are judgment calls that
have to be made by both the patient and
the and and the Physicians right so hurt
though yeah so her two negative can
spread people can die from her two
negative cancers uh breast cancer they
triple negative breast which has none of
the markers on the surface these kinds
um but you know and there are drugs uh
for this but but the bottom line that we
have looked at is the mitochondria or
abnormal and her2 positive uh PR
positive
triple negative the mitochondria normal
what does that mean that means whatever
cells are in that mass are going to have
to be using glucose and glutamate so we
already know what those cells are doing
in there why don't we shut their fuels
off collapse them potentially get rid of
them and then what's ever left
surgically debunk it reducing the risk
of of having spread now of course a lot
of women are going to go through the
standard and not and not have to worry
about recurrent metastatic cancer but
many of them do and and the issue is you
want to reduce the risk of spreading
something that doesn't need to be
provoked I mean you can manage some of
these things without provocation and
making the outcome better then I mean
it's going to be good outcomes for a lot
of people don't get me wrong here they
say that everybody will get stuck with a
as Peter said you know it doesn't happen
that often but it happens enough to know
that there are many many scientific
reports in the literature describing
inflammatory oncotaxis coming from the
biopsy of the tissue itself in an
attempt to determine uh what it is and
people should be aware and they have to
make that decision with their care team
yeah I think I think but right now the
problem is what I just relate to you is
not known understood or recognized by
the majority of those working in the
oncology field they are not aware of
what I just said yeah they don't read
the scientific literature describing
what I just said because when I told
Peter about oh well I didn't hear it I
said Peter you got to read the
literature it's there if you if you just
read the papers you're going to see I've
seen it for prostate breast colon lung
liver all of these different cancers
where inflammatory onco taxis has been
documented in the scientific literature
okay so it's not a it's not something
that's never been seen oh I didn't know
about that well how often do you read
the papers like I read these papers I'm
sitting there going wow look at this did
they do these guys know about this well
they never speak about it that means
they don't know about it
if they did you should up front the
patient and say listen there's an
outside chance this technique could
spread it around all the reasons why I'm
not saying I guarantee I'm just saying
there's an outside risk factor
associated with this yeah all the reason
why
again early detection is a big part of
getting to you know the earlier you
treat cancer and especially if you can
find a non-invasive way to detect your
cancer early you can get on the train
early and you know you've shared this
before but everybody's so worried and
they call you all the time and say well
what if this metabolic therapy which is
essentially I don't know I know you
don't like that term because it's a lot
more than the ketogenic diet it's a
bunch of Lifestyle things exercise sleep
you know reducing stress but diet is a
big part of it they're so concerned that
what if the patient has a negative
response to this right and your thing is
that look what do you have to lose it
would be tough right but what do people
have to lose and based on your mechan of
mechanism of action that you've
displayed you've presented the argument
here you have everything to gain yeah I
I you have you have a lot to gain uh or
listen I don't like to say gain I think
you have these are called risk risk
assessments and you want to do things
that are going to be make the lowest
level of risk for uh making something uh
worse than it actually has to be so um I
think a lot of these tumors and Cancers
can be managed very very effectively uh
without invasive procedures uh if people
know what to do and how to do it uh and
you know here I'm speaking about what I
understand
from years of reading research and doing
my own experiments and seeing what's
happening uh to a field that doesn't
read the same kinds of information uh or
is not privy to it
um so you have this Gap there's no
consensus discussion uh about this is it
possible that we could yes early
detection is great if we can detect it
early with non-invasive procedures and
then manage it with non-invasive
procedures and then go in at the end
with an invasive surgical debulking
removal uh to in to significantly reduce
the possibility of making something
worse than it has to be so it has to
again be a team the surgeon plays a big
role in this you know
um so and as I said why why are we
sticking this thing well we need to know
whether it's benign or malignant and
then they want to do a gene profile
readout on a lot of these things to tell
you what kind of mutations you have in
the tumor uh that's another thing that
they it's a big industry looking at the
mutations in the tissue but if the
mutations are all Downstream effects
then most of that stuff is irrelevant
anyway what are you worried about if
they can't use if they're fermenting and
you take away their fermentable fuels
the the mutations go away because the
cancer cells die yeah you know so you
essentially are living in the future
with your cancer therapy approach but we
have to fight to raise the awareness and
really with the people that are
listening today they should be the
people to demand to their anybody that's
listening including the doctors that we
need a different yeah you know the
problem what I'm telling people and
on these podcasts and stuff you know it
might create anxiety in a lot of people
because and I feel bad about it too I
mean you're asking me what I what I do I
mean this is what I do for a living
right I read all these papers all the
time I test this stuff on pre-clinical
systems I have my my clinician friends
try it on cancer patients we publish
case reports we see really quite
significant outcomes so so
um but again the people say oh yeah this
is the greatest stuff they go down to
their oncologist oh no that doesn't work
no clinical trials there's no evidence
to support anything seafood Saint show
me the evidence that's that's not
supporting it
you know I mean it's just one of those
kinds of things I you know I I know
you're joking a little bit that you feel
bad but it's important that this
information gets out there it's people
it's important that people understand
the lay of the land it's important that
people understand
really that this super scary disease
cancer that our bodies are not just
innately messed up that's something just
went completely wrong there are genetic
forms of mutations of of cancers that
are very rare right genetic genetically
uh their second secondary risk factors
secondary risk factors every one of
those inherited mutations like bracha 1
and p53 and all these others they
damaged mitochondria they disrupt
oxidative phosphorylation so there's so
someone who has a bracha one because not
every woman who has bracha one develops
a breast tumor of course it's about 50
or 60 penetrant if you have a mutation
inherited that's 100 penetrant then
that's a primary cause of the problem
but since all the mutations are not 100
penetrant they are risk factors just as
someone would be working in a factory
with chemical carcinogens not everybody
in the factory would get cancer from
working with those chemical carcinogens
right does your lifestyle turn those
genes on do they turn them off the diet
and lifestyle could provoke those
chemical carcinogens or those genetic
risk factors to become uh uh more
prominent absolutely so this is why you
have to be aware of of all of these
things I I don't know if prophylactic
removal of organs is the best way to
deal uh with bracha one but I certainly
think because it's not a hundred percent
penetrant that means diet and lifestyle
could certainly reduce the risk of
having bracha 1B be be uh uh uh uh
reduce the risk of having that
absolutely Thomas this has been
fantastic and as we're concluding over
here and this is I mean there's such a
wealth of knowledge that you have help
us understand a little bit more about
your work and your research like how
have you guys typically gone about the
funding that allows you to document
these cases as well as you know uh
publish and put out the education that
you do and is there any way that the
folks that are listening today can be
you know supportive in the process by
putting their attention on anything well
our sport now comes predominantly from
private foundations and from
philanthropy so
um you know there's a number of people
that uh there are a number of folks out
there that want to be part of a new
movement and uh a knowledge a knowledge
base approach uh to managing cancer
without toxicity and they want to
support us uh they support us through
funds to foundations supporting us and
they support us by philanthropy uh just
saying I know I I this is the future
what I've just described to you Prince
pulse metabolic therapy is going to be
the future of cancer management and
prevention in this country uh how fast
do we get there like you've indicated we
have massive Caverns
there's wall firewalls that have to be
overcome there's ideological Dogma that
has to be overcome and there's a desire
to be healthy and want to live and those
all those things have to come together
but it's going to happen because it's
based on the hard science the science is
telling us this is what is underlying
the problem and this is what you need to
do to manage it so there are some people
now I know there's some people say well
I got to try to figure make how to make
a buck and what seafreed is saying you
know I I'm not an entrepreneur I I don't
I don't deal with those kinds of things
our our issue is how do we prove that
what we're saying is correct how many
case reports can I write showing that
people that are that should have been
dead a long time ago are enjoying a
quality of life far longer than they
would have been what's wrong with that I
mean that's reward in itself to know
that the ideas and the science that
you've that you've articulated and
tested actually act works and ultimately
that's going to be the way people are
going to come to know whether this stuff
is right or Not by seeing all these
folks that should have been dead walking
around with a fairly good healthy and uh
prolonged Lane that's pretty that's
pretty much the evidence that you need
to know that if you're no if you know
your science is right then you should
have a lot of successful cases that that
uh that are out there and we're trying
to write these up and we're writing a
protocol so that we can get more and
more of these folks so there's people
that are interested intrinsically
interested in this kind of stuff and
we're working out all the details right
now and the money that we get comes from
private foundations and philanthropy to
do this and if anybody want here wanted
to be a part of that process and donate
is that possibility yeah well they have
Travis christopherson's you know
foundations for cancer metabolic therapy
he has a website called that Travis it's
the foundation for cancer metabolic
therapies his his work supports us and
you know we have money from the English
British childhood foundation and we have
a philanthropy just folks that want to
donate money to us through Travis's
foundation and and we we and that keeps
my research staff going the pre-clinical
animal models are expensive to work with
uh we we have to work with a lot of
different
um Strat new strategies we're doing
constantly looking for diet drug combos
that will be even more effective than
the ones we have right now so press
pulse we're working on the whole concept
of of press and pulse synergistic
interaction and we're going to come up
with very new kinds of non-toxic drugs
working specifically with a new
metabolic body change and this is going
to be very devastating to the tumor cell
and super healthy to the remaining cells
of the body so we it's a lot of it's
trial and error what we call non-sexy
science this is not the kind of stuff
you get big NIH grants for because this
is the stuff that's actually going to
work in the clinic you know this is the
kind of stuff that oh is it that doses
is it this timing is it this scheduling
of these three or four combos yeah
that's what works the best well you
can't write a grant up to the NIH to say
I want to try to do this well that's
unsexy you know uh so we're not
interested in sexy science we're
interested in in in therapeutic outcome
how long can you live with something
that should have killed you and you're
doing well uh that's that's the ultimate
goal uh and we don't want people losing
their hair we don't want people bleeding
from their gums you know feeling like
horrible all the time vomiting nausea
all that kind of stuff we we want to try
to eliminate that and have these people
new emerge in a much more healthy
healthy knowing that they had a
life-threatening condition and that's
that's no longer life-threatening so
this is our strategy and we're working
to achieve that strategy yeah and it's
important work I'd love to donate I'll
be in I'll be in touch with your team
I'll make sure that we list inside of
the show notes here if anybody else
wants to be a part of the process
because
you know my hope of day is that the NIH
wakes up or other you know big
government institutions wake up and
realize but that's going to take a lot
of momentum yeah which is already
starting right and thankful for New
Media means like YouTube and social
media and podcasting to be able to help
spread the word but this is really the
future of cancer therapy and you're
bringing it to us right now and I really
appreciate you coming on the podcast and
sharing as somebody who you know cancer
has touched my life my aunt passed away
from cancer and my mom has had cancer
knock on wood you know we detected it
early and she had an incredible team
that supported her around it and and one
of the first things that her functional
medicine doctor did was basically talk
to her about the importance of
dramatically reducing the amount of
carbohydrates that she was on and and
completely switching her lifestyle and
getting her exercise up all the things
that you talked about here on prevention
well that makes that makes everything
the other approaches might work much
better absolutely absolutely and of
course you know she did have some uh
shortened radiation you know there's a
place where you know there's a place for
these other tools and and things that
are in the context if you're if the team
determines it but if we can add data and
lifestyle factors to it that's going to
be you know as you mentioned it's going
to make it much more likely to happen
Thomas if people want to keep in touch
with you do where do you want to send
them well um you know a number of people
are emailing me for information
uh which I send out in an email rather
than the thousands of phone calls I mean
the phone was running off the hook while
we were doing the interview yeah you
know I just don't know what to say
maybe I should stop doing all this stuff
and get back to just teaching students
in the in the but we but we you know
we have this research we've started to
publish Open Access people can read all
my papers it's open access it's not like
you have to be a member of some
scientific Society
um yeah donate to Travis
christopherson's Foundation I think that
that'll keep us going uh because we're
here for the Long Haul uh we're not
going anywhere so um but but you're
right I I I have to have a new I I don't
know what to say
since these podcasts have started it's
like I'm being buried uh with all these
poor folks that I'd I'd love to be able
to you know give them we're working on
the treatment protocol now and I think
once we can publish this treatment
protocol then it becomes at least
something to do and and we can set up
these clinics
um but uh that it's coming let let I I
wish I had something to say it takes
time it takes time and I feel bad and
resources yeah
resources you know but but you're right
it's it's a pittance compared to what
we're spending on this disease yeah uh
uh currently well thank you again for
being here super appreciate you hope to
have you back in the future yeah thank
you very much it's a pleasure hey
YouTube If you enjoyed what you just saw
keep watching for more great content on
how to improve your brain and your life
seventy percent of the people are still
by definition clinically depressed even
with treatment it gets worse than that
though because if you follow those
people for 12 years and you see how they
fare